# Language and Reasoning

What is language? The term "language" encompasses written language and spoken language, including recordings of spoken language, and language in the form of synthesized speech.

Are non-pronounceable symbols, such as the internationally recognized [hazard symbols](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hazard_symbol), a form of language? What about smoke signals? Computer code? Morse code? Is any digitally recorded information a form of language? What about random bits recorded on a hard drive?

I find it likely the reader will agree that of the things mentioned in the previous paragraph, some are language and some aren't. I will leave the reader to consider these questions (and the [Sorites paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorites_paradox) their series may or may not form) in more depth if they wish.

Getting deeper insight into what language is requires determining general principles and laws concerning language. There is so much language in the world that understanding language by exhaustive analysis of all existing language is blatantly impossible. Moreover, each of us has an enormous store of personal experience with language. Therefore, to discover general principles and laws concerning language, primarily we need to reflect on our own experiences and experiment with different generalizations, methods, and theoretical perspectives to find productive avenues to taming the great complexities of language.

Why understand language? If knowledge is power, then knowledge of language promises to be an extraordinarily useful form of power. Language dominates numerous aspects of life and it is the most common mechanism by which powerful people acquire and exercise their power.

Mathematics is to a significant extent the theoretical key to understanding, and therefore controlling, the natural world. In contrast, theory that enables us to understand language offers us the promise of controlling linguistic reality, turning words to our advantage in any kind of situation. Such a power, obviously, can be used for good or evil, which is one reason that philosophical people have a responsibility to concern themselves with ethics, as we will do later in this book, and to adhere to ethical principles as well as merely studying them.

In terms of the direction of this book, the reason for discussing language and discussing it first is that our understanding of language is the foundation for our understanding of reasoning, though we discuss them in an intertwined way for convenience.

Our understanding of language and reasoning provide the foundation for our understanding of history and the methodology of history. The reason for this foundational relationship is that history is at its core a task of gathering and analyzing information, where analyzing information means analyzing mostly linguistic data to determine its evidentiary significance in terms of what it says or might say about the past. History is an intellectual investigation which must employ philosophically sound principles of reasoning, and the biggest portion of the data to be analyzed is langague, which is why an understanding of language and reasoning is an important foundation for the philosophical pursuit of history.

These three areas, language, reasoning, and history, cumulatively provide the foundation for our analysis of decision making (which is inclusive of value and ethics). A thesis of this book is that our understanding of value, ethics, and other decision making factors is best founded on generalization from numerous historical and stereotypical case studies. The theory says that it's often easy to see in retrospect what things were good and bad, and that history shows us the consequences of various ways of thinking about decision making factors. We will get into all of this more later.

In short, the understanding of language is the first layer in a tower of foundations we're going to build. To put it simply, explaining language helps us explain reasoning (and also vice versa); explaining language and reasoning helps us explain history; and explaining language, reasoning, and history helps us explain value.

There are many theoretical perspectives we can take on language. We will provide a history of the study of language which will introduce many of these perspectives. I will provide right now a theoretical perspective on language that I find particularly fruitful. This is to think of language as a form of technology.

What is technology? The simplest form of technology is a tool. A simple example of a tool is a stick that a primate uses to capture ants to eat. This simple example illustrates that a thing produced by nature, a stick, becomes a tool when it's used by an animal to accomplish a purpose. More sophisticated tools are also all made by animals from things found in nature. In the modern industrial world, tools are generally manufactured from natural resources with the help of a dizzying array of existing tools and other forms of technology.

There are many forms of technology that we wouldn't usually call tools, including books, satellites, medicines, etc. All of these things could plausibly be called tools. One loose way of using the word "tool" would be as a synonym for technology.

We can begin to see the plausibility of thinking of language as a kind of technology by reflecting on simple cases such as a hypothetical language given by Wittgenstein in the *Philosophical Investigations* (part I, remark 2), which we are here divorcing from its significance in the original context:

> The language is meant to serve for communication between a builder A and an assistant B. A is building with buildingstones: there are blocks, pillars, slabs and beams. B has to pass the stones, and that in the order in which A needs them. For this purpose they use a language consisting of the words "block", "pillar", "slab", "beam". A calls them out;—B brings the stone which he has learnt to bring at such-and-such a call.——Conceive this as a complete primitive language.

In this hypothetical language, the words "block," "pillar," "slab," and "beam" can easily be understood as tools that the construction workers are using to do their jobs. If we think of words as tools, then they are tiny tools which modern humans group together and deploy in highly complex ways to accomplish all kinds of purposes. Very little gets done in modern life without language, so if language is a toolset, then it is an extraordarily useful one.

Language is much more abstract than prototypical examples of tools like sticks and hammers. However, it's no less abstract than, say software. If it's a stretch for you to call language a toolset, you can call it a form of technology.

One might argue that a significant difference between language and prototypical examples of technology is that technology is a tangible product which exists in the material world, whereas language is more abstract, existing first and foremost as a skill set some animals have, and secondly as physical records of language which are however useless without language-competent animals to interpret them.

This alleged difference, I think, is less clearly existent when we consider the nature of technology more closely. Consider, for example, that all currently existing technology will eventually cease to function without human attendance, and that technology ceases to serve a purpose without animals to use it. Recorded language, on the other hand, ceases to serve a purpose without animals to derive meaning from it.

To further explore the similarities between language and other forms of technology, consider a computer algorithm (e.g., the [quicksort algorithm](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8hHWpuAPBHo), or the [LZW compression algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lempel%E2%80%93Ziv%E2%80%93Welch)). A computer algorithm is a form of technology. It can exist as an idea in somebody's head; as an idea on paper; as a working piece of code; as a patent; as a distributed product; etc. An algorithm is a kind of technology, but it's a kind of technology that seems to have a diffuse existence, being embodied in people's heads and on hard drives and as legal concepts and so on and so forth. In the respect of having a diffuse existence, an algorithm is very much like a word, which is typically embodied in countless utterances and written instances, and crucially in the understanding of the word of every person who knows it.

So far I have argued for the following categorical relationship: the category "technology" subsumes the category "language." I have described this categorical relationship as being a theoretical perspective on language. How is it a theoretical perspective, and not just an interesting, contentious, and yet fairly unimportant statement of category inclusion?

The value of taking a technological perspective on language is that it ties the conversation on language firmly to practice and practical ends at all times. With technology, every [yak-shaving](http://sethgodin.typepad.com/seths_blog/2005/03/dont_shave_that.html) intellectual detour is ultimately tied back to some practical end. In the case of good technology, those bonds are firm and achieve a successful, tight feedback loop between theory and practice. That feedback loop is something we want out of a practical philosophy of language. We want our theory of language to be deeply informed by the real world of linguistic occurrences, and to yield dividends in practical applications of language in many areas.

We will find situations where thinking of language as technology which exists for practical reasons allows us to cut through a haze of philosophical confusions that might otherwise beset us. The important thing is that this way of thinking allows us to distinguish between questions about language that do and do not matter. In my view this is especially critical to success in philosophy of language because there are no universal, binding rules concerning language use (everybody is master of their own speech), and without such rules it often proves impossible to get a foothold on philosophy of language questions that don't matter. This is not to say that philosophy of language questions that matter are always tractable, or that tractable philosophy of language questions always matter.
